Keyboard Communication Protocol

The keyboard data line is bidirectional and is driven by whatever device is
sending data. The keyboard clock line is driven by the keyboard only. All
data transfers are synchronous with the keyboard clock. Each transmission
consists of eight bits, with the highest-order bits first. 

When sending data to the Macintosh, the keyboard clock transmits eight
330-usec cycles (160 usec low, 170 usec high) on the normally high clock
line. It places the data bit on the data line 40 usec before the falling
edge of the clock line and maintains it for 330 usec. The data bit is
clocked into the Macintosh's VIA shift register on the rising edge of the
keyboard clock cycle. 

When the Macintosh sends data to the keyboard, the keyboard clock transmits
eight 400-usec cycles (180 usec low, 220 usec high) on the clock line. On
the falling edge of the keyboard clock cycle, the Macintosh places the data
bit on the data line and holds it there for 400 usec. The keyboard reads the
data bit 80 usec after the rising edge of the keyboard clock cycle. 

Only the Macintosh can initiate communication over the keyboard lines. On
power-up of either the Macintosh or the keyboard, the Macintosh is in
charge, and the external device is passive. The Macintosh signals that it's
ready to begin communication by pulling the keyboard data line low. Upon
detecting this, the keyboard starts clocking and the Macintosh sends a
command. The last bit of the command leaves the keyboard data line low; the
Macintosh then indicates it's ready to receive the keyboard's response by
setting the data line high. 

The first command the Macintosh sends out is the Model Number command. The
keyboard's response to this command is to reset itself and send back its
model number to the Macintosh. If no response is received for 1/2 second,
the Macintosh tries the Model Number command again. Once the Macintosh has
successfully received a model number from the keyboard, normal operation can
begin. The Macintosh sends the Inquiry command;  the keyboard sends back a
Key Transition response if a key has been pressed or released.  If no key
transition has occurred after 1/4 second, the keyboard sends back a Null
response to let the Macintosh know it's still there. The Macintosh then
sends the Inquiry command again. In normal operation, the Macintosh sends
out an Inquiry command every 1/4 second. If it receives no response within
1/2 second, it assumes the keyboard is missing or needs resetting, so it
begins again with the Model Number command. 

There are two other commands the Macintosh can send:  the Instant command,
which gets an instant keyboard status without the 1/4-second timeout, and
the Test command, to perform a keyboard self-test. Here's a list of the
commands that can be sent from the Macintosh to the keyboard: 

  Command name    Value    Keyboard response
  Inquiry         $10      Key Transition code or Null ($7B)
  Instant         $14      Key Transition code or Null ($7B)
  Model Number    $16      Bit 0:    1
                           Bits 1-3: keyboard model number, 1-8
                           Bits 4-6: next device number, 1-8
                           Bit 7:    1 if another device connected
  Test            $36      ACK ($7D) or NAK ($77)

The Key Transition responses are sent out by the keyboard as a single byte: 
Bit 7 high means a key-up transition, and bit 7 low means a key-down. Bit 0
is always high.  The Key Transition responses for key-down transitions on
the keyboard are shown (in hexadecimal) in Figure 12. Note that these
response codes are different from the key codes returned by the keyboard
driver software. The keyboard driver strips off bit 7 of the response and
shifts the result one bit to the right, removing bit 0. For example,
response code $33 becomes $19, and $2B becomes $15. 

_______________________________________________________________________________

 Keypad Communication Protocol

When a numeric keypad is used, it must be inserted between the keyboard and
the Macintosh; that is, the keypad cable plugs into the jack on the front of
the Macintosh, and the keyboard cable plugs into a jack on the numeric
keypad. In this configuration, the timings and protocol for the clock and
data lines work a little differently:  The keypad acts like a keyboard when
communicating with the Macintosh, and acts like a Macintosh when
communicating over the separate clock and data lines going to the keyboard.
All commands from the Macintosh are now received by the keypad instead of
the keyboard, and only the keypad can communicate directly with the
keyboard. 

When the Macintosh sends out an Inquiry command, one of two things may
happen, depending on the state of the keypad. If no key transitions have
occurred on the keypad since the last Inquiry, the keypad sends an Inquiry
command to the keyboard and, later, retransmits the keyboard's response back
to the Macintosh. But if a key transition has occurred on the keypad, the
keypad responds to an Inquiry by sending back the Keypad response ($79) to
the Macintosh. In that case, the Macintosh immediately sends an Instant
command, and this time the keypad sends back its own Key Transition
response.  As with the keyboard, bit 7 high means key-up and bit 7 low means
key-down. 

The Key Transition responses for key-down transitions on the keypad are shown in
Figure 12.

***Refer to Figure 12.***

Figure 12-Key-Down Transitions

Again, note that these response codes are different from the key codes
returned by the keyboard driver software. The keyboard driver strips off bit
7 of the response and shifts the result one bit to the right, removing bit
0. 